---
title: I shaved 65 kilobytes off my site
date: 2021-03-18T00:53:47.797Z
tags: [changelog, web]
---

I saved 65 KB on this site. Basically, I removed two web-fonts and cut out some CSS. Overall, I went from 93.8 KB to 28.8 KB.

I rewrote my styles using vanilla CSS. Originally, I was using a [SCSS](https://sass-lang.com/) because of its nesting capability. Another benefit of SCSS is that you can split your styles among multiple files. By default, CSS doesn't perform well in that respect[^1]. An advantage of using CSS, was that it forced me to write my styles more succinctly. By limiting myself to one file, I gave myself a practical reason to keep the file size to a minimum.

I also started loading fewer web-fonts. I removed the body and display web-fonts, opting for local fonts instead. I was using Roboto (sans-serif) for the body text, and Lora (serif) for the headings. I switched them both to a single, local-only, "catch-all" font stack. I can hardly tell the difference.

Otherwise, I made minimal changes to the website's visual design. In the process of rewriting the CSS, I made some stylistic decisions. For example, I changed the theme of my code blocks from "Nord" (a dark theme) to "GitHub Light". I also removed the CSS reset I was using, which was [normalize.css by Nicolas Gallagher](https://necolas.github.io/normalize.css/).

<figure>
	<table>
		<caption>Size Comparison *</caption>
		<thead>
			<tr>
				<th></th>
				<th>Before</th>
				<th>After</th>
			</tr>
		</thead>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<th scope="row">Roboto font</th>
				<td>15.4 KB</td>
				<td>0</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<th scope="row">Lora font</th>
				<td>34.5 KB</td>
				<td>0</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<th scope="row">Google Fonts CSS **</th>
				<td>11.4 KB</td>
				<td>2.4 KB</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<th scope="row">Normalize & code-block theme **</th>
				<td>4.2 KB</td>
				<td>854 B</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<th scope="row">Sitewide CSS **</th>
				<td>5.4 KB</td>
				<td>3.4 KB</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<th scope="row">Print CSS</th>
				<td>801 B</td>
				<td>748 B</td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
	<figcaption>
		* GTmetrix reports: <a
			href="https://gtmetrix.com/reports/binyam.in/liis7IAh/"
			rel="noopener noreferrer"
			target="_blank"
		>before</a>, <a
			href="https://gtmetrix.com/reports/binyam.in/sMZ9qRYW/"
			rel="noopener noreferrer"
			target="_blank"
		>after</a><br />** Uncompressed size
	</figcaption>
</figure>

Oh, and the best part is... my site is now only 100 ms faster. 326% smaller, 8.3% faster. Go figure. 🤷‍♂️

[^1]: Think about it. Every time you request a CSS file, whether using a `<link/>` tag or `@include` syntax, you make a network request. As every network request has a cost, it's much more practical to combine your CSS into one file.
